RFC for Kernel Templates (#2301)
uxlfoundation/oneDPL: rfcs/experimental/kernel_templates/kernel_configuration/README.md

# Kernel Configuration

## Introduction

`kernel_param` is a generic structure for configuring SYCL kernels.
Each kernel template is invoked with a `kernel_param` type or object.
Typically, a kernel template supports multiple values for the configuration parameters.
Optimal values may depend on the invoked kernel, the data size and type(s),
as well as on the used device.

## Signature

```c++
// defined in <oneapi/dpl/experimental/kernel_templates>
// in namespace oneapi::dpl::experimental::kt

template <std::uint16_t DataPerWorkItem,
          std::uint16_t WorkGroupSize,
          typename KernelName = /*unspecified*/>
struct kernel_param;
```

The library guide describes all the signature details in
https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/blob/oneDPL-2022.8.0-release/documentation/library_guide/kernel_templates/kernel_configuration.rst.

## Open Questions

### Runtime Parameters

> The `data_per_workitem` and `workgroup_size` parameters are currently provided at compile time,
> but their optimal values depend on the number of elements to process, which is known only at run time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `data_per_workitem` and `workgroup_size` parameters are currently provided at compile time,
but their optimal values may depend on the number of elements to process, which is known only at run time.
```

> It should be investigated whether these parameters can be made run-time configurable
> without compromising efficiency.

Reviewer: It sounds like an "either/or" choice between compile-time and run-time parameters, but it does not have to be such.
```suggestion
It should be investigated whether dynamic, run-time configurable parameters can be supported
without compromising efficiency.
```

### Sub-group Size as a Parameter

> Choosing an appropriate sub-group size is important for performance,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some devices configuring a sub-group size might be important for performance,
```

as it impacts factors such as register pressure and
the number of sub-groups to synchronize.
The optimal value depends on the device architecture and
the characteristics of the workload, for example, the type of elements being processed.

The performance benefit should be demonstrated in practice,

> given the added complexity to the interface.

Author: Thanks, a corresponding section has been added.

I have not listed the alternative approach, though. I am not aware of any practical use-cases or demand to pass a number of elements at compile time, and it is more restrictive than passing an index type.

The performance benefit should be demonstrated in practice,
given the added complexity to the interface.

### Indexing Type

32-bit indices have been shown to improve the performance of algorithms with standard interfaces
from the binary search and merge families,
when the index range is sufficient to process the given input sequences.

It should be investigated whether this parameter should be exposed in Kernel Templates.
To determine where to introduce it, we need to assess how many algorithms would benefit:
- If the number is small,
  a more specialized kernel configuration structure that includes the parameter may be added.
- If the number is larger,
  the parameter may be added into `kernel_param`, either as an optional or mandatory member.

Another possible solution is to let the user specify the number of elements as a parameter,
and then deduce the index type from the type of this parameter. For example:

```c++
template <typename InputIt, typename SizeType, typename OutputIt, typename KernelParam>
sycl::event copy_n(InputIt input, SizeType n, OutputIt output, KernelParam param);
```

However, this method is not compatible with range-based inputs,

> where the number of elements is determined implicitly from the range itself.

Reviewer 2: One more open after thinking about algorithmic parameterization which I am curious to hear your thoughts about:

All of our algorithms require significant global memory traffic. GPU hardware contains vector load / store instructions for memory operations which can result in:

1. Fewer total memory requests
2. Lower register pressure as we only compute one address per vector request
3. Potentially a more efficient data layout for algorithmic processing (e.g. a reduce operation could load a vec4 of its type and do work-item local reductions before doing sub-group followed by work-group level reductions)

In oneDPL mainline implementations, we have only employed vector memory operations in very limited scenarios as it can be platform specific. Maybe exposing some kernel parameter such as `VectorWidth` could allow users more freedom to improve performance at this low level. Alternatively, it could be an algorithm parameter and decided on a per algorithm basis.

Author: Added in [d5b12c1](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/commit/d5b12c100b78ff8eabeebfe9cd3de366dc209f6c)
